Welcome back delightful people in this video with a built on the theory that we had in the last one
and we're actually getting it moving.
Working with mouse look has a decent amount of code here.
But if we keep it nice and organized I think it can be easier to follow.
So what do we actually need to do.
Well the first is pretty simple.
What we need is to add a jump key that's easy enough.
The second is to find a way of separating Judy and 3D movement information.
Then we're going to apply to any movement to the camera transform.
What I mean by that is when we press a key We're going to figure out where should I be moving it really
relative to the camera.
That was quite hard to say and I don't know why.
Finally we're going to get the vertical movement going to figure out jumping in gravity might even polish
this up by using an acceleration deceleration we shouldn't take on.
Okay so let's get into the game.
We're going to spend our time in our script someone to put this in distraction free mode.
And I need to move some things around.
Right now we've got this variable here motion which is kind of a catch all but I'm going to separate
out velocity and direction because they're different things.
So let's get rid of motion entirely and going to call this velocity.
Then I make a new one and I call it direction.
You'll notice I'm not actually calling it direction I'm calling it a bell but these mean velocity in
direction if you want right velocity and direction.
I'm also going to need a few movement constants because if I'm going to be adding things like acceleration
deceleration gravity jumps to be there should go here so let's do that as a constant for gravity.
And this is going to be a negative value as it were moving down in the y axis right.
So let's say for now negative 45.
Trial and error show me that with this system this is a good value that we can fix this later.
Now we've already got an up value but I'm going to put this here with my movement variables because
it feels like it's the right place for it in fact let's give this a heading this is movement costs.
Let's put a space fair and spot Constance correctly just so we're very clear what's happening.
We should also do something with speed.
In fact I'm not going to using speed I mean using max speed.
We're going to be using some acceleration and deceleration.
So let's move this down here and call this max speed and our maximum speed might see 24.
Now again we can fix these when we need to and we can reshuffle these as well as we go.
Couple more things on it.
I've been talking about acceleration and deceleration.
So let's put those in.
These are constants right we're going to and this is how much we're going accelerate by how much would
be a decelerate by his acceleration.
Let's call that five and a deceleration.
Let us go and get a call that 10.
I got a lot up my.
It's not a.
Cos it's not much a pang.
I got quite a lot of this information or the structure from the demos that I was talking about I have
made some serious tweaks so if you can see these looking the same the official godso examples and tutorials
have a lot of this information including excel and DSL.
DSL isn't really a thing this should be DSL shouldn't decelerate.
One more concern I know going to need is jump speed and finality call that 15.
Let's put gravity and just speak close to each other just so I can see them.
So speed and acceleration are all connected.
I'm now reasonably happy with these constants.
Let's get coding.
We are going to.
Look at our move function and all of this is going to be pulled out because we need to do is set is
separate out the two dimensional movement and we're not using motion at all.
Instead let's make a new variable.
We call this movement's direction movement direction is which directions the player wants to move in
and we know this because of this forward back left right and in a moment space.
Right.
And that's going to be a vector too.
And that's key.
This is a vector to not a vector 3.
And before I forget let's actually put in an input mapping that jumps into project settings input map
as I make a new thing called Jump.
Have been capitalizing these.
Okay.
I mean the key for space.
Right now this is a vector too but where am I going to get the to front.
I'm going to make a new functionless call that gets to be mint.
And before I forget it I'll put it right here.
We're going to call it get chimley movements.
So I now know that this is a function that I have to write.
I'm going to be getting the 2d movement.
I also need to get the camera right so make a variable called camera x form X form is short for transform.
What is that.
Well it's camera up dot get global transform.
So we now have the camera transform.
Okay let's do some work with this.
What we need is the direction is going to be this camera transform.
And what do we need and it's only the basis.
Great.
So I have the basis of it.
I don't need all the basis.
I just want a standard access right.
I want the forward backward motion the forward backward motion on this axis is Z right in three dimensions
towards and away from the screen of the z axis.
And I should probably normalize this as you might remember from kudi Kick about if we don't normalize
this when we move diagonally going to move faster because Pythagoras.
Now I don't set this to be the carrier transform.
I want to change it.
I don't want to add plus.
And the reason why is if I'm looking to the left and moving to the right I need to subtract it so when
to subtract the camera transform basis Z normalized and we need some change in it by the movements to
do that.
Now multiply it in movement under score direction.
Why.
OK.
There's quite a lot happening here.
All of this is going to live in movement direction.
So what's happening is when I press forward take that why valued because this is now a two dimensional
transform like this isn't 2D access.
So why is up down.
So as I move up.
Get the camera transform.
Get the basis on the z axis normalize it and multiply it by this value with a change motion out in the
moment.
So it feels a little complicated a little magical at first but it is logical it does make sense.
So that's our why access.
Let's do the same thing on the x axis.
So direction negative equal.
And because only thing negative equal not equal I'm not replacing this value.
I'm altering it caser camera transform dot basis and this is the x axis.
A sis can type.
There.
X.
Dot normalize normalize not normalize.
Multiplied by movement underscored direction.
Dot X..
Alright.
So what's going to happen is we're gonna make this direction change by the basis multiplied by where
we're trying to move.
So what we're doing is are altering this value.
We're doing it twice.
We do it on this axis.
And this axis you notice we're not doing the y axis which is great.
This means I can move.
I can look up and down anyone actually change that movement.
Now all of these motions I'm going to have to change to make that simple let's just move them for now
they are going to live in.
Where do you go get to demat movement.
So just put me in copy paste them if you're happy with that.
Let's just make two spaces between functions very nice.
So this is going to be need need to be change because right now motion doesn't exist.
It's not a real thing.
Now I need to start passing these values on and make new functions.
The first thing to do is I need a function called move quickly and I'm in a set direction equals move
vertically.
Now you'll notice that I've just altered direction here and here I am setting it and that could be an
issue.
Now I do want this to be a new value.
So what do we do on a pass direction into it and then return this value back.
So it's going to be the new value.
I also need to give it Delta because we need the delta in there.
Now we have all the directions that's put in some velocity and our velocity is going to up their losses.
There it is is going to need its own new function.
Here we want an accelerate function.
Right direction is which way are moving velocities how fast.
So velocity is going to be this new horizontal acceleration.
Excel will write it like that because acceleration is hutzpah.
And again I'm going to pass in a direction and Delta.
We have quite a lot going on here.
Going to be making some new functions.
We're almost done with this section and all they need to do now is change this motion because this motion
no longer exists.
There is no very awkward motion so this is going to velocity.
Right.
And what's the velocity is the horizontal acceleration which is going to do something with this direction.
And Delta we now have some new functions we need to make.
But before we do that I'd like to challenge you to fix get to the movement right now.
It's not going to work right.
So what I'd like to do is change this new function get to the movement to return a to d movement vector
to the main move function and just to make it really simple for you.
I'm going to start you off by going variable.
What should we call this as call this movement vector.
And it's a vector hoodie.
Right.
So just to just to make that really simple for me.
What I'd like you to do is return the value Movent factor to the main move function.
Now this is going to be altered depending on what's happening with the.
Going to use all those inputs that we've just moved in there.
And here's a tip you might want to normalize this.
And I've written normalize.
But what I mean is I had the normalized function to pause the video give that a shot.
When you come back I'll show you my solution.
And welcome back.
Okay so most of this is fine.
Right.
What I do want to do is change motion and I'm going to use movement vector.
I'm going to copy and paste.
So let's copy and paste that.
So far so good.
We've now got two values.
However I can't use z z won't work in vector 2.
There are only two vectors in this array so I need a y k so why is my 4 up and down.
Or in this case forward and backwards and X is my left and right my horizontal.
One more thing I need to do is actually return this value.
Do that and we've done it a couple times.
I'm just going to go return.
Let's scroll down.
It's maximum doing turn movement vector and I want is normalized.
Why are we normalizing this.
Because as we've seen before.
If I move forward and right we're not going to get a simple value of one we're going to get a sample
of one point something one point for I think it is by using normalize we bring that back down to one
that's going to give us a nice consistent movement rate.
So what we need to do just to be very clear what's happening here.
I know I'm doing quite a lot of code in this video is thank you.
We have movement vector set in motion.
We have x and y instead of x and z and we are returning the value.
So we get to call this function and send this back.
Now we're asking for movement direction and what we're returning is a variable called movement vector.
Except it's okay we're not returning.
A variable called movement vector we're returning for value it doesn't matter what the function get
to see movement calls it.
What matters is what the value of that is and move is now going to call movement direction.
Whatever this value is so it's now called movement direction which is great because now when I move
on by say D it's going to use these values that we now have and put to the camera tracks.
Okay so how are we going to move vertically What is it.
Well this handles jumping and gravity which is why I'm going to need some deltora in here.
Let's put this above an inmate right here so function and calling it do do move vertically.
Perfect.
And this gets to values right direction and only gets Delta than a colon.
Okay I need to isolate the uptown and the up down is the y axis here right.
Because we work in three dimensions.
Get back to a three dimensional value and how do we know because velocity is a vector.
3 Our Velocity on the y axis is plus equal.
I'm going to be adding gravity times Delta.
Let's program in a jump if input.
Is action just pressed.
Great and I want to jump.
So if I if play is just press jump and we're on the floor is on the floor is on floor is going to work
because with defined up in our move and slide which is due to right here you're on the floor and press
jump.
Then I'm going to reset vostock.
I've lost it all.
Why is going to be jumpseat.
Whatever this value is whatever the why.
Part of the vector 3 known as velocity is it's now jump speed right in with set jumps speed at the moment
to 15.
So you're going to lose 15 up in the air.
Alright so what if that isn't the case.
Elf is on floor.
Well Don why he zero.
So let's see what's going to be happening here.
Every frame set the all Y axis of velocity.
So might be down to velocity by gravity times delta.
Okay now we're already applying Delta in moving slide right.
It's built in to moving the slide right.
So what we're actually doing is gravity times Delta times Delta which is gravity times Delta squared
gravity times.
Time squared is an acceleration.
So going to accelerate down.
However if I'm on the floor and if pressed jump set there's value to positive 15 and if I'm just on
the floor and I'm not pressing jump set the value to zero.
So this gravity will only apply if I'm in the air.
Now remember we got here by setting direction to be move vertically with direction and Delta coming
in.
I need to do a couple of tweaks right.
I want direction dot y to be 0.
And I want to normalize it against a direction towards direction not normalized.
Quick recap when we check for move vertically every frame we're taking this direction which is going
to be which whale moving on the x and y with passing in direction.
Doctor we are changing velocity.
We're applying gravity if we need to.
We're jumping if we done otherwise we're setting velocity 0 and then just making sure that the direction
on the y axis doesn't change.
So the mouse isn't affecting where we're moving and we're returning that value.
We don't have to return velocity because this is the first time we are using it right it's being set
up here as an instance variable and it's not being changed in get to the movement as it shouldn't be.
While I'm here I've just noticed moving the slide I changed motion to the losty.
Fantastic.
What it didn't do is get rid of speed.
Were not using inning of which you knew velocity.
Now we just need to worry about horizontal acceleration slowing down and speeding up and this one is
not too difficult.
So let's go in here function and what we call this I forgot what I called it.
Excel.
Perfect.
Function horizontal acceleration which is going to pass the argument direction and Delta again I need
to separate out the 2d That's make a new variable and I'm dealing with speed and I'm dealing with acceleration.
So any of the velocities I would call the get velocity to the energy have set that as the velocity and
when tweak it now because this is 2D.
I'm going to zero out the losty Scott to day.
Why we call 0 0 out the up and down information and I don't care about that that's going to stay that
is because then I can add the velocity to the information back to velocity.
Let's play this capital D.
I can see on doing.
And it's not going to break everything.
OK.
New variable.
I'm going to call this Target.
Target is going to be what how fast do I want to be going.
Right.
Which direction we're going to target is going to be itself tyne's Equals.
There's a new one we have used before.
Max speed go.
So what our Max speed.
That's what I'm going to be aiming for.
So from going forward that's going to be a one effect negative one multiplied by the macspeech.
I want to be heading in that direction to that amount.
But I'm not there yet.
So what I need to do is to accelerate make a new variable again excel.
And this is in lower case this isn't the same as the constant.
It's not our acceleration rate it's our current acceleration and now any TV was a dot product which
is kind of magical maths a little bit.
But what I care about is what's the length of this vector was the length of velocity underscored to
Dean.
And is it greater than zero.
If so my Excel variable is equal to my acceleration rate right.
It's not my boobs it's my right leg or else it's not my Excel variable is equal to my deceleration rate.
This is a really nice weight solution and I say this because I didn't come up with it this comes from
the got documentation that got examples right on to make that very clear.
This code is great.
I had to tweak it so I could figure out what was going on with it.
But it's lovely.
Okay now we don't want this value to be magically up or down right.
I don't want to go.
I want to speed up or slow down to do that.
We're gonna use a lot of velocity 2D.
There it is.
Eagles velocity to day not linear interpolate which is our lung function.
And what are we doing or we're taking it target and the next value is acceleration by Delta because
we are accelerating this isn't a constant speed.
It's a linae interpolate.
We've seen the lap function perform.
But just to remind you what's on vector so effective 3 right what value were changing and how much we
change it by.
Well we're changing our target which is where do we want to be moving in a 2D plane.
And we only have two year mission here.
And then we're accelerating using acceleration times doctor.
Right.
So we accelerating Robert just moving at a flat rate.
Okay so we have the Losey 2D.
We need to put this into velocity and almost is velocity.
Dot X equals velocity underscored two d legs and then the same thing with Z.
And I'm not going to change the Y.
So the Losey he doesn't care about the y axis so we're not going to change that.
And if I've done everything correctly this is the moment of truth was done quite a lot of code that
Checking have me ever pressed play.
I'm going to crash because I've forgotten something incredibly silly.
I make sure the error message I want to find not found Delta.
But wait and you've written Delta everywhere it's here it's here it's at you know I haven't written
it in move.
I didn't pass the delta function to move because I am a mullet.
Am I a yarn.
Or am I a Muppet.
If I'm a Muppet I'm a very manly Muppet.
Second thing I copy and pasted a bunch of variables over existing variables and I didn't check them
so that needs to be like this.
Third thing I went to called this or C to D in caps except here where it didn't notice what I was typing
so let's change that.
And thirdly I need to remember just because I haven't touched anime doesn't mean I'll work.
Motion length will no longer work.
Instead I need velocity like a veiled length.
Now if I press play we can look around.
I can press forward moving backwards.
Oh dear.
Oh either of us okay.
This is the problem when Yan thinks he understands maths Sometimes I make silly mistakes.
This actually shouldn't be a negative call.
It should be a plus for meshwork fine.
Pressplay.
Forward.
I can go back and I left.
I can go right and then when I press forward in this direction it'll change.
Now what I haven't done is stop myself from moving right here in the move function.
Just after I declare my variables I'm sure the reset direction to 0 direction is vector 3 0 0 0 0.
Now I'll probably have to tweak some values but I can now stop.
I say tweaks in values because look the animation.
Is it quite there.
What's happening here is the blend Idol amount which is right here is too small some a change at zero
point to see how that works.
Better.
And care.
And I think my acceleration could do with my deceleration could do with tweaking so much as tweak that
real quick.
My decelerations cardio 10 let's matel of the 15 you know slow down much faster you accelerate.
So a basic acceleration and basic deceleration.
Now we could keep tweaking this idle value so my blender idle.
Is there a point to maybe zero point five.
So you're actually moving quite a lot for it to do anything.
It's a little jerky though isn't it.
So let's just change that to zero point two five.
But look at what we have.
I can move relative to the mouse.
Here I go moving around the desk the giant desk and I can jump over the desk which is still the same
colour as the floor because reasons.
But I can do it.
And if I'm on the desk I can jump because the desk counts floor and from the floor I can jump but I
can't double jump.
We have three mouse movement and some of it might feel a little complicated.
Don't be afraid to go through this again or to ask questions.
But look in this video we've gotten a basis from a transform we've separated to see in 3D.
And we are now moving with mouse like quite a lot going on in this video.
So please share experiences.
Do you have a better solution.
Do you have better variable names.
Did you spot all those mistakes I made and not make them yourself.
I'd love to hear how you're getting on.
And meanwhile excellent work and I'll see you in the next few years.